# Thesis: Relationships between cis-regulatory landscape evolution, gene expression evolution and phenotypic evolution in vertebrates

## Abstract

In multicellular organisms, gene expression is regulated by complex molecular interactions involving \gls{cis}-acting regulatory sequences, which are located on the same chromosome as their target genes, and \gls{trans}-acting factors present in nucleus. Identifying these elements is now possible thanks to the development of numerous molecular techniques. However, defining the associations between genes and \gls{cis}-regulatory sequences remains challenging, not least because they may be located at large genomic distances from the genes they control. These distal \gls{cis}-regulatory elements and their target gene promoters are brought into physical proximity in the nucleus through chromatin loops. These loops can now be detected through chromosome conformation capture ("C") techniques. Such data are now rapidly accumulating, allowing us to better define \gls{cis}-regulatory landscapes and to understand the implications of chromatin contacts in gene expression and its evolution.\\

During my PhD, I combined and analysed chromatin contact maps obtained with the Promoter Capture Hi-C (PCHi-C) technique for multiple cell types in mouse and human. First, I compared the \gls{cis}-regulatory landscapes defined by classical genomic approaches and by chromatin contacts. I developed GOntact, a tool that infers functional enrichments for sets of regulatory elements, based on the annotations of the genes they contact. Second, using these chromatin contact data, I showed that there is significant evolutionary conservation of \gls{cis}-regulatory landscapes in vertebrates, indicating that natural selection acts to preserve not only the sequences of regulatory elements but also their chromatin contacts with target genes. I showed that the evolution of \gls{cis}-regulatory landscapes, measured in terms of element sequences, synteny or chromatin contacts with target genes, is significantly associated with the evolution of gene expression.Finally, I sought to assess the relationship between the evolution of \gls{cis}-regulatory elements and the phenotypic evolution of organisms. I studied the convergent loss of the phallus in several bird lineages. The genetic determinism of this phenotypic change is still unknown but seems to involve changes in the expression patterns of highly conserved developmental genes. Using open chromatin data and comparative genomic approaches across several bird lineages, I analyzed the evolution of potential \gls{cis}-regulatory sequences. This allowed us to propose candidate regions involved in the development of the phallus in birds.\\

The results obtained in this thesis highlight the importance of chromatin contacts in determining the associations of genes with their regulatory elements in an evolutionary context. By redefining \gls{cis}-regulatory landscapes, we showed that their evolution can explain the evolution of gene expression and that new functions can be attributed to regulatory elements. Our results also confirm that studying the evolution of these \gls{cis}-regulatory elements can provide hypotheses for major morphological changes.
